When this deep revival happened, right so
in 2006 a very important study was or a very
important contribution was made by Hinton
and Salakhutdinov.
.
Sorry, if I have not pronounced it properly
and they found that a method for training
very deep neural network effectively.
Now, again the details of these are not important.
We will be doing that in the course at some
point, but what is the important take away
here is that while from 1989 to 2006.
We knew that there is an algorithm for training
deep neural networks and they can potentially
be used for solving a wide range of problems
because that is what the universal approximation
theorem said, but the problem was that in
practice we were not being able to use it
for much, right.
It was not easy to train these networks, but
now with this technique there was revived
interest and hope that now actually can train
very deep neural networks for lot of practical
problems, this sparked off the interest again.
And then, people started looking at all such
of thing, right that even this particular
study which was done in 2006 will actually
be very simple to something done way back
in 91-93 and which again showed that you can
train a very deep neural network.
But again due to several factors may be at
that time due to the computational requirements
or the data requirements or whatever I am
not too sure about that, it did not become
so popular then, but by 2006 probably the
stage was much better for these kind of networks
or techniques to succeed.
So, then it became popular in 2006.
.
Then, this 2006 to 2009 people started gaining
more and more insights into the effectiveness
of this discovery made by Hinton and others
which is unsupervised pre-training, right.
That is what I spoke about on the previous
slide unsupervised pre-training.
And they started getting more and more insights
into how you can make deep neural networks
really work, right.
So, they came up with various techniques,
some of which we are going to study in this
course.
So, this was about how do you initialise the
network better, what is the better optimization
algorithm to use, what is the better regularization
algorithm to use and so on.
So, there were many things which were started
coming out at this period 2006 to 2009 and
by 2009, everyone started taking note of this
and again deep neural networks of artificial
neural networks started becoming popular.
That is when people realised that all this,
all the negative things that were tied to
it that you are not able to train it well
and so on.
Have slowly people have started finding solutions
to get by those and maybe we should start
again focusing on the potential of deep neural
networks and see if they can be used for large
scale practical application, right.
So, this 2006 to 2009 was again a slow boom
period were people were again trying to do
a lot of work to popularize deep neural networks
and get rid of some of the problems which
existed in training them.
Now, from 2009 onwards there was this series
of success is which kind of caught everyone
which made everyone to stand up and take notice,
right that this is really working for a lot
of practical applications starting with handwriting
recognition.
So, around 2009, these guys won handwriting
recognition competition in Arabic and they
did way better than the competitor systems
using a deep neural network and then, this
was a success.
.
So, this was an handwriting recognition and
then, there was speech.
So, this shown that various existing systems,
the error rate of these system could be seriously
be significantly reduced by using deep neural
networks or plugging in a deep neural network
component to existing systems, right.
So, this was handwriting and then, speech.
.
Then again some kind of pattern recognition
which was on handwritten digit recognition
for MNIST; this is a very popular data set
which had been around since 98 and a new record
was set on this data.
So, this is the highest accuracy that was
achieved on this data set around that time
in 2010, sorry and this is also the time when
GPUs entered the same, right.
So, before that all of the stuff was being
done on CPUs, but then people realised that
very deep neural networks require a lot of
computation and lot of this computation can
happen very quickly on GPUs as opposed to
CPUs.
So, people started using GPUs for training
and that drastically reduced the training
and inference time.
So, that was again something which sparked
a lot of interest, right because even though
these were successful, they were taking a
lot of time to train, but now the GPUs could
even take care of that and this success continued.
.
So, people started gaining or getting success
in other fields like visual pattern recognition.
So, this was a competition on recognising
traffic sign boards and here again a deep
neural network did way better than its other
competitors.
.
And then, the most popular or one thing which
made neural networks really popular was this
Image Net Challenge which was around since
2008 or 2009 and before 2012 when this AlexNet
was one of the participating systems in this
competition, most of the systems were non
neural network based systems and this competition
was basically about classifying a given image
into one of thousand classes, right.
So, this could be an image of a bird or a
dog or a human or car, truck and so on say
you have to identify the right class of the
main object in the image, right.
So, in 2012 this AlexNet which was a deep
neural network or a convolutional neural network
based system was able to actually outperform
all the other systems by a margin of 67 percent,
right.
So, the error for this system was 16 percent
and this is a deep neural network because
it had 8 layers.
The next year this was improved further and
something known as ZF network propose which
was again 8 layers, but it did better than
AlexNet.
The next year even a deeper network with 19
layers was proposed which did significantly
better than AlexNet.
Then, Google entered the scene and they proposed
something which is 22 layers and again reduced
the error, then Microsoft joined in and they
proposed something which had 152 layers and
the error that you see here is actually better
than what humans do, right.
So, even if a human was asked to label this
image because of certain law, certain noise
in the image and so on, even a human is bound
to make more errors than 3.6 percent, right.
That means, even if you show hundred images
to humans, he or she is bound to may go wrong
or more than three or four of these images
right there is this system was able to get
an error of 3.6 percent over the large test
set.
So, this 2012 to 2016 period were there was
this continuous success on the Image Net Challenge
as well as successes in other fields like
Natural Language Processing, Handwriting recognition,
Speech and so on.
So, this is the period where now everyone
started talking about deep learning and lot
of company started investing in it.
A lot of traditional systems which were not
deep neural network based was now started,
people started converting them to deep neural
network based system, right.
So, translation system, speed systems, image
classification, object detection and so on,
there were lot of success in all these fields
using deep neural networks, right.
And this particular thing that we are talking
about which is image net and the success in
this was driven by something known as Convolutional
Neural Networks.